---
published: true
layout: post
title:  "Misinformation Response Rationale"
categories: [Misinformation response]
description: Why I choose to scream into the void.
---

A reasonable question for one to ask when stumbling upon a blog like this--which was originally solely meant to house my personal projects and documentation--is why bother committing a substantial amount of time to writing responses to public health misinformation. You cannot combat every falsehood that is published on the internet (or in the form of a [book](https://claremontreviewofbooks.com/whats-up-doc/)), and you will very quickly find that attempting to do so will require you to play a game of never ending whack-a-mole. I am keenly aware of this. 

But what I am also keenly aware of, and what I feel is missing within the majority of this discourse, is that not all of the hysteria and distrust in our public health officials is unfounded. Bad science exists. I have seen it, you have seen it or heard of it, and we can all probably point to that *one* study that lingers in our mind when we think of scientific dishonesty. And, to make matters worse, the response to COVID-19 both from public health researchers in particular only made matters worse. Suddenly, journals like the Lancet, hailed for their impact in the medicinal sciences, were hastily pushing COVID-related papers through the peer-review process, leading to [one of the most egregious epidemiology paper retractions](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/jun/05/lancet-had-to-do-one-of-the-biggest-retractions-in-modern-history-how-could-this-happen) in recent memory. [RetractionWatch](https://retractionwatch.com/retracted-coronavirus-covid-19-papers/), one of the most important websites on the internet, has the running total of retracted or otherwise withdrawn COVID-19 papers at over 500, with nearly 20 different papers having "letters of concern" published related to their rigor. 

There is also the problem of a historical perversion of the status given to scientists for no other reason than that they are scientists for capitalistic gain. Big Pharma and [Big Tobacco's](https://www.merchantsofdoubt.org/) utilization of for-sale scientists in particular are two particularly famous and embarrassing stains on the scientific community as a whole. I sympathize and indeed share in the disgust for these moments. And yet I vehemently disagree with everything that the HHS secretary, his baggage, and those who follow his and this current administration's cult of personality stand for. How can that be? 

These viewpoints should not have to be conflicting. I can (and you can, too) simultaneously believe that there is a reproducibility crisis in science, that some scientists are more than happy to sell their dignity and purposefully manipulate the public with horrific science and intentionally misinterpreted results for money, **and** that this is not indicative of science as a whole or even a large proportion. The vast majority of us are not paid well, if at all (I have yet to be for any work, even the work that was considered good enough to be published after a year and a half of analysis. I am not an outlier). The work-life balance and workplace conditions of grad students is so horrible in the United States that [11%](https://grad.uw.edu/advice/being-supportive-and-getting-support-suicide-prevention-for-grad-students/) of graduate students seriously consider suicide annually. This is not a profession that is entered into for glory and cushy salaries; for the vast majority of us we do this work because we are deeply passionate about the subject and, in the case of epidemiologists, because we care about people. 

You  may then wonder if this is not contradictory: if scientists are not paid well, does this not incentivize them to be paid off by megacorporations? Sure, this may be true, and if I were to be presented with strong evidence that this is the case I would not be particularly surprised. Luckily you can scroll down to the bottom of any scientific paper and read who is funding the authors and their stated conflicts of interest (anecdotally, if you state none then you are asked to reconfirm this fact during the peer review process). But in any case, how does the current approach by the organizations that the current HHS secretary, for example, supports combat this? By pulling even more funding from institutions and further lambasting and shaming public health professionals in the public square? By pushing out American scientists from the country so that the only "scientists" left are verifiably [intentionally omitting ideological conflicts of interests?](https://www.hrc.org/resources/the-lies-and-dangers-of-reparative-therapy) Surely not, right? How does refuting years upon years of evidence that measles vaccines being safe without proof combat this? 

One of the sources of disconnect between scientists and the public (and occasionally amongst scientists) that I most often observe is what a scientific result actually indicates. If a paper finds evidence for one result, does that mean that the research on this topic is closed because no other result could ever be possible? No; and it never has. And yet when results are discussed in an informal setting, say on television or in a newspaper article, there is usually no special effort taken to ensure that this is clear. We use words like "x **causes** y" when causality is not possible with the study's choice of design. We say that something has been **proven** to be true. It is convenient to do this, sure, but it also assumes that the layperson understands that science is, and always has been, an iterative process. That a prior result being shown to be incorrect is not necessarily a result of malpractice in the original work. This is of course always possible, but it usually is not the case. 

Whether we like it or not, I believe that we have a responsibility to confront and address bad faith efforts to undermine scientific results when there is a lack of evidence to motivate us to do so. In the same vein, it is important to remember that the majority of people who believe in even the most ridiculous of anti-vax/anti-science claims are *reachable* but cannot be convinced by simply throwing even more science literature at them (a futile and yet common tactic; see [Roger Pielke, Jr.'s The Honest Broker](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/honest-broker/A41AD4D7D14077165807DBE057B5FAF9) for a more comprehensive reasoning as to why this will never work). It should be noted that when I say the "majority of people" I am of course not talking about the class of the 1% in this country; politicians such as RFK Jr. and the Senate that confirmed him, as well as oligarchs like Elon Musk should, as far as I am concerned, not be bothered with. They know what they are doing in their attempts create divide within classes in this country and always have. 

And so that is why I am writing these posts: to attempt to bridge this disconnect. Scientific results within public health are usually not very difficult to interpret, and the ones that are should not be impossible to grasp for the general public. If they are, then we have failed in the inherent role of effective communicators we have to play as researchers and public health officials. This series is an attempt to do my part to correct course on where we have lacked as a community up until now. 